

Hi class!

Welcome to CS241 System Programming!  I'm Lawrence Angrave. I'm excited to be your instructor this semester and to meet you personally Wednesday in DCL1320 at 10AM or 11AM.

You've probably heard this is a challenging class! Yes, you'll need is time, tenacity and readiness to learn and use C. And the big picture - this course is a stepping stone - You're leaving behind CS225 land (where you write code that works with the course's provided code) and instead we're your launch pad you for the big leagues CS4xx at a tier-1 CS school. Take this course seriously and you will be a different and better person at the end of it.

Prepare your neurons.

C is one of the smallest, portable and simplest and "close-to-the-metal" languages that you'll ever use. Unlike C++ it is possible to actually nearly know all of the C specification in under 50 hours. Even if you program in the future with python/Go/Javascript ... you'll be linking and using cross-platform libraries written in ... C. And if you want your new self-aware-high-performance AI/Vision/networking/neural net/quantum computing/picture mod ibrary to be used everywhere i.e. useful directly from  Matlab/R/C++/Java programs... or you want to exploit meltdown CPU attack...  you'll first or second choice will be ...C

C programs use a lot of memory pointers. This means your variables hold memory addresses (and the compiler uses the type of variable to infer how many bytes to read/write at that location). Everything is great providing your pointers point to the correct piece of memory and don't start reading or writing from incorrect pieces of memory. You can even indirectly cause "exciting things to happen" if you pass a bad pointer to a library or system call too.

Pointers can be tricky to learn, but it helps to remember that

0) Asterisk in code "*" is either part of the type ("This is a pointer!") but in an expression it means follow the pointer and read the memory that it points to.

1) They just hold a memory address  (which CAN be changed e.g " myptr = ... " )

2) For a program to use ("dereference") a pointer, then the CPU will need to perform another memory access,

3) The variable type is a hint to the compiler as to how many bytes to read/write and is also useful to detect some programming errors at compile time.


(I admit I simplified the last part about compilers but hey this is about using pointers with confidence, not about implementing a compiler OK?)

Let's get started today, right now, with Homework Zero - my introductory mini-course. If you open the link below up on a powerful laptop or desktop using Chrome / Firefox you'll discover videos, man pages, and a complete virtual linux machine running inside your browser (yes it implements memory,disk and CPU in javascript and then boots up a linux machine with gcc and other standard tools - pretty cool! - it works best in Chrome). There's one #include issue with waitpid that I'll let you discover (and find a workaround) in the last lecture.

http://tinyurl.com/vizzini2016

The questions are here

https://github.com/angrave/CS241-Lectures-SP20/blob/master/HW0.md


We will put up a link to submit HW0 starting the first lab section, although it won't be due until the following week.

You can also regular linux machines and other online environments of course. I suggest you work on HW0 a bit each day (it's much better for long term recall and innate skills acquisition if you exercise your CS241 neurons each day).

With a bit of google magic and hunting you can also find: Piazza, secondly my *free* wikibook and Homework 0 (keep your answers to each question - we'll ask you to submit these as part of a lab) and of course the course website. However here are some starting points :-)

http://piazza.com/illinois/spring2020/cs241

Send all CS241 questions, comments, ideas, regrades, logistics, issues, grade requests,bananas-for-scale etc to Piazza - not to my email :-)

http://cs241.cs.illinois.edu/
.

Ready? Let's Go!

- Captain Angrave

p.s. Myself and the course staff love teaching this course. We're here help as many of you as possible to become the best programmers and computer scientists that you can be. Are you ready to stand up, put in the effort, and be recognized as an University of Illinois Computer Scientist? Then you're in the right place. Let's kick it into gear and get this show started.

p.p.s. As we speak EngrIT + CS241 staff are also preparing a server-side multi-CPU-core virtual machine for each and everyone of you. More details next week.

p.p.p.s Don't Panic, you'll be writing less code than Hamilton's Apollo team-

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Hamilton_(scientist)
... but you will be thinking about concurrency, just like she had to for the Apollo code.

